An important aspect of dialogue response generation systems, which are trained to produce a reasonable utterance given a conversational context, is how to evaluate the quality of the generated response. Typi- cally, evaluation is done using human-generated su- pervised signals, such as a task completion test or a user satisfaction score ( Walker et al., 1997;Möller et al., 2006;Kamm, 1995), which are relevant when the dialogue is task-focused. We call models opti- mized for such supervised objectives supervised di- alogue models, while those that do not are unsuper- vised dialogue models.This paper focuses on unsupervised dialogue re- sponse generation models, such as chatbots. These Faced with similar challenges, other natural lan- guage tasks have successfully developed automatic evaluation metrics. For example, BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002a) and METEOR ( Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) are now standard for evaluating machine translation models, and ROUGE (Lin, 2004) is often used for automatic summarization. These metrics have recently been adopted by dialogue researchers (Ritter et al., 2011;Li et al., 2015;Galley et al., 2015b;Wen et al., 2015;Li et al., 2016). However these metrics assume that valid responses have significant word overlap with the ground truth responses. This is a strong assump- tion for dialogue systems, where there is significant diversity in the space of valid responses to a given context. This is illustrated in Table 1, where two rea- sonable responses are proposed to the context, but these responses do not share any words in common and do not have the same semantic meaning.We focus on metrics that are model-independent, i.e. where the model generating the response does not also evaluate its quality; thus, we do not con- sider word perplexity, although it has been used to evaluate unsupervised dialogue models . This is because it is not computed on a per-response basis, and cannot be computed for retrieval models. Further, we only consider met- rics that can be used to evaluate proposed responses against ground-truth responses, so we do not con- sider retrieval-based metrics such as recall, which has been used to evaluate dialogue models ( Schatzmann et al., 2005;). We also do not consider evaluation methods for supervised evalua- tion methods. 1 Several recent works on unsupervised dialogue systems adopt the BLEU score for evaluation. Ritter et al. (2011) formulate the unsupervised learning problem as one of translating a context into a candi- date response. They use a statistical machine trans- lation (SMT) model to generate responses to various contexts using Twitter data, and show that it outper- forms information retrieval baselines according to both BLEU and human evaluations.  extend this idea using a recurrent language model to generate responses in a context-sensitive manner. They also evaluate using BLEU, however they produce multiple ground truth responses by re- trieving 15 responses from elsewhere in the corpus, using a simple bag-of-words model. Li et al. (2015) evaluate their proposed diversity-promoting objec- tive function for neural network models using BLEU score with only a single ground truth response. A modified version of BLEU, deltaBLEU ( Galley et al., 2015b), which takes into account several human- evaluated ground truth responses, is shown to have a weak to moderate correlation to human judgements using Twitter dialogues. However, such human an- notation is often infeasible to obtain in practice. Galley et al. (2015b) also show that, even with sev- eral ground truth responses available, the standard BLEU metric does not correlate strongly with hu- man judgements.There has been significant previous work that evaluates how well automatic metrics correlate with human judgements in in both machine translation (Callison-Burch et al., 2010;Callison-Burch et al., 2011;Bojar et al., 2014;Graham et al., 2015) and natural language generation (NLG) (Stent et al., 2005;Cahill, 2009;Reiter and Belz, 2009;Espinosa et al., 2010). There has also been work criticizing the usefulness of BLEU in particular for machine translation (Callison-Burch et al., 2006). While many of the criticisms in these works apply to dialogue generation, we note that generating di- alogue responses conditioned on the conversational context is in fact a more difficult problem. This is because most of the difficulty in automatically eval- uating language generation models lies in the large set of correct answers. Dialogue response genera- tion given solely the context intuitively has a higher diversity (or entropy) than translation given text in a source language, or surface realization given some intermediate form ( Artstein et al., 2009).per context):Given a dialogue context and a proposed response, our goal is to automatically evaluate how appropri- ate the proposed response is to the conversation. We focus on metrics that compare it to the ground truth response of the conversation. In particular, we inves- tigate two approaches: word based similarity met- rics and word-embedding based similarity metrics.where k indexes all possible n-grams of length n and h(k, r) is the number of n-grams k in r. 3 To avoid the drawbacks of using a precision score, namely that it favours shorter (candidate) sentences, the au- thors introduce a brevity penalty. BLEU-N, where N is the maximum length of n-grams considered, is defined as:We first consider metrics that evaluate the amount of word-overlap between the proposed response and the ground-truth response. We examine the BLEU and METEOR scores that have been used for ma- chine translation, and the ROUGE score that has been used for automatic summarization. While these metrics have been shown to correlate with human judgements in their target domains ( Papineni et al., 2002a;Lin, 2004), they have not been thoroughly investigated for dialogue systems. 2 We denote the ground truth response as r (thus we assume that there is a single candidate ground truth response), and the proposed response asˆrasˆ asˆr. The j'th token in the ground truth response r is denoted by w j , withˆwwithˆ withˆw j denoting the j'th token in the proposed responsê r.β n is a weighting that is usually uniform, and b(·) is the brevity penalty. The most commonly used ver- sion of BLEU uses N = 4. Modern versions of BLEU also use sentence-level smoothing, as the ge- ometric mean often results in scores of 0 if there is no 4-gram overlap (Chen and Cherry, 2014). Note that BLEU is usually calculated at the corpus-level, and was originally designed for use with multiple reference sentences.METEOR. The METEOR metric (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) was introduced to address several weaknesses in BLEU. It creates an explicit align- ment between the candidate and target responses. The alignment is based on exact token matching, followed by WordNet synonyms, stemmed tokens, and then paraphrases. Given a set of alignments, the METEOR score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall between the proposed and ground truth sentence.BLEU. BLEU ( Papineni et al., 2002a) analyzes the co-occurrences of n-grams in the ground truth and the proposed responses. It first computes an n-gram precision for the whole dataset (we assume that there is a single candidate ground truth response 2 To the best of our knowledge, only BLEU has been eval- uated in the dialogue system setting quantitatively by Galley et al. (2015a) on the Twitter domain. However, they carried out their experiments in a very different setting with multiple ground truth responses, which are rarely available in practice, and without providing any qualitative analysis of their results.ROUGE. ROUGE (Lin, 2004) is a set of evalua- tion metrics used for automatic summarization. We consider ROUGE-L, which is a F-measure based on the Longest Common Subsequence (LCS) between a candidate and target sentence. The LCS is a set of words which occur in two sentences in the same or- der; however, unlike n-grams the words do not have to be contiguous, i.e. there can be other words in be- tween the words of the LCS.An alternative to using word-overlap based metrics is to consider the meaning of each word as defined by a word embedding, which assigns a vector to each word. Methods such as Word2Vec ( Mikolov et al., 2013) calculate these embeddings using distribu- tional semantics; that is, they approximate the mean- ing of a word by considering how often it co-occurs with other words in the corpus. 4 These embedding- based metrics usually approximate sentence-level embeddings using some heuristic to combine the vectors of the individual words in the sentence. The sentence-level embeddings between the candidate and target response are compared using a measure such as cosine distance.tasks (Wieting et al., 2015). The embedding aver- age, ¯ e, is defined as the mean of the word embed- dings of each token in a sentence r:To compare a ground truth response r and retrieved responsê r, we compute the cosine similarity be- tween their respective sentence level embeddings:Greedy Matching. Greedy matching is the one embedding-based metric that does not compute sentence-level embeddings. Instead, given two se- quences r andˆrandˆ andˆr, each token w ∈ r is greedily matched with a tokenˆwtokenˆ tokenˆw ∈ ˆ r based on the cosine similarity of their word embeddings (e w ), and the total score is then averaged across all words:Vector Extrema. Another way to calculate sentence-level embeddings is using vector ex- trema ( Forgues et al., 2014). For each dimension of the word vectors, take the most extreme value amongst all word vectors in the sentence, and use that value in the sentence-level embedding:This formula is asymmetric, thus we must average the greedy matching scores G in each direction. This was originally introduced for intelligent tutor- ing systems (Rus and Lintean, 2012). The greedy approach favours responses with key words that are semantically similar to those in the ground truth re- sponse.where d indexes the dimensions of a vector; e wd is the d'th dimensions of e w (w's embedding). The min in this equation refers to the selection of the largest negative value, if it has a greater magnitude than the largest positive value. Similarity between response vectors is again com- puted using cosine distance. Intuitively, this ap- proach prioritizes informative words over common ones; words that appear in similar contexts will be close together in the vector space. Thus, common words are pulled towards the origin because they occur in various contexts, while words carrying im- portant semantic information will lie further away. By taking the extrema along each dimension, we are thus more likely to ignore common words.Embedding Average. The embedding average metric calculates sentence-level embeddings using additive composition, a method for computing the meanings of phrases by averaging the vector repre- sentations of their constituent words ( Foltz et al., 1998;Landauer and Dumais, 1997;Mitchell and Lapata, 2008). This method has been widely used in other domains, for example in textual similarityIn order to determine the correlation between au- tomatic metrics and human judgements of response quality, we obtain response from a diverse range of response generation models in the recent literature, including both retrieval and generative models.4 To maintain statistical independence between the task and each performance metric, it is important that the word embed- dings used are trained on corpora which do not overlap with the task corpus.Ranking or retrieval models for dialogue systems are typically evaluated based on whether they can retrieve the correct response from a corpus of pre- defined responses, which includes the ground truth Matching Extrema R-TFIDF 0.536 ± 0.003 0.370 ± 0.002 0.342 ± 0.002 0.483 ± 0.002 0.356 ± 0.001 0.340 ± 0.001 C-TFIDF 0.571 ± 0.003 0.373 ± 0.002 0.353 ± 0.002 0.531 ± 0.002 0.362 ± 0.001 0.353 ± 0.001 DE 0.650 ± 0.003 0.413 ± 0.002 0.376 ± 0.001 0.597 ± 0.002 0.384 ± 0.001 0.365 ± 0.001 LSTM 0.130 ± 0.003 0.097 ± 0.003 0.089 ± 0.002 0.593 ± 0.002 0.439 ± 0.002 0.420 ± 0.002 HRED 0.580 ± 0.003 0.418 ± 0.003 0.384 ± 0.002 0.599 ± 0.002 0.439 ± 0.002 0.422 ± 0.002 Table 2: Models evaluated using the vector-based evaluation metrics, with 95% confidence intervals.response to the conversation ( Schatzmann et al., 2005). Such systems can be evaluated using recall or precision metrics. However, when deployed in a real setting these models will not have access to the cor- rect response given an unseen conversation. Thus, in the results presented below we remove one occur- rence of the ground-truth response from the corpus and ask the model to retrieve the most appropriate response from the remaining utterances. Note that this does not mean the correct response will not ap- pear in the corpus at all; in particular, if there ex- ists another context in the dataset with an identical ground-truth response, this will be available for se- lection by the model. We then evaluate each model by comparing the retrieved response to the ground truth response of the conversation. This closely imitates real-life de- ployment of these models, as it tests the ability of the model to generalize to unseen contexts.Dual Encoder. Next we consider the recurrent neural network (RNN) based architecture called the Dual Encoder (DE) model ( ). The DE model consists of two RNNs which respectively compute the vector representation of an input con- text and response, c, r ∈ R n . The model then cal- culates the probability that the given response is the ground truth response given the context, by taking a weighted dot product: p(r is correct|c, r, M ) = σ(c T M r + b) where M is a matrix of learned pa- rameters and b is a bias. The model is trained using negative sampling to minimize the cross-entropy er- ror of all (context, response) pairs. To our knowl- edge, our application of neural network models to large-scale retrieval in dialogue systems is novel. TF-IDF. We consider a simple Term Frequency -Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) retrieval model ( . TF-IDF is a statis- tic that intends to capture how important a given word is to some document, which is calculated as: tfidf(w, c, C) = f (w, c) × log Table 4: Correlation between BLEU metric and human judgements after removing stopwords and punctuation for the Twitter dataset.N |{c∈C:w∈c}| , where C is the set of all contexts in the corpus, f (w, c) indi- cates the number of times word w appeared in con- text c, N is the total number of dialogues, and the denominator represents the number of dialogues in which the word w appears.In order to apply TF-IDF as a retrieval model for dialogue, we first compute the TF-IDF vectors for each context and response in the corpus. We then return the response with the largest cosine similar- ity in the corpus, either between the input context and corpus contexts (C-TFIDF), or between the in- put context and corpus responses (R-TFIDF).   HRED. Finally we consider the Hierarchical Re- current Encoder-Decoder (HRED) ( ). In the traditional Encoder-Decoder frame- work, all utterances in the context are concatenated together before encoding. Thus, information from previous utterances is far outweighed by the most recent utterance. The HRED model uses a hier- archy of encoders; each utterance in the context passes through an 'utterance-level' encoder, and the output of these encoders is passed through another 'context-level' encoder, which enables the handling of longer-term dependencies.When evaluation metrics are not explicitly corre- lated to human judgement, it is possible to draw misleading conclusions by examining how the met- rics rate different models. To illustrate this point, we compare the performance of selected models ac- cording to the embedding metrics on two different domains: the Ubuntu Dialogue Corpus ( Lowe et al., 2015), which contains technical vocabulary and where conversations are often oriented towards solv- ing a particular problem, and a non-technical Twitter corpus collected following the procedure of Ritter et al. (2010). We consider these two datasets since they cover contrasting dialogue domains, i.e. tech- nical help vs casual chit-chat, and because they are amongst the largest publicly available corpora, mak- ing them good candidates for building data-driven dialogue systems. Results on the proposed embedding metrics are shown in Table 2. For the retrieval models, we ob- serve that the DE model significantly outperforms both TFIDF baselines on all metrics across both datasets. Further, the HRED model significantly outperforms the basic LSTM generative model in both domains, and appears to be of similar strength as the DE model. Based on these results, one might be tempted to conclude that there is some infor- mation being captured by these metrics, that sig- nificantly differentiates models of different qual- ity. However, as we show in the next section, the embedding-based metrics correlate only weakly with human judgements on the Twitter corpus, and not at all on the Ubuntu Dialogue Corpus. This demonstrates that metrics that have not been specif- ically correlated with human judgements on a new task should not be used to evaluate that task.Data Collection. We conducted a human survey to determine the correlation between human judge- ments on the quality of responses, and the score as- signed by each metric. We aimed to follow the pro- cedure for the evaluation of BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002a). 25 volunteers from the Computer Science department at the author's institution were given a context and one proposed response, and were asked to judge the response quality on a scale of 1 to 5. 5 ; a 1 indicates that the response is not appropriate or sensible given the context, and a 5 indicates that the response is very reasonable. Out of the 25 respon- dents, 23 had Cohen's kappa scores κ &gt; 0.2 w.r.t. the other respondents, which is a standard measure for inter-rater agreement (Cohen, 1968). The 2 re- spondents with κ &lt; 0.2, indicating slight agree- ment, were excluded from the analysis below. The median κ score was approximately 0.55, roughly in- dicating moderate to strong annotator agreement.Each volunteer was given 100 questions per dataset. These questions correspond to 20 unique contexts, with 5 different responses: one utterance randomly drawn from elsewhere in the test set, the response selected from each of the TF-IDF, DE, and HRED models, and a response written by a human annotator. These were chosen as they cover the range of qualities almost uniformly (see Figure 1). 5 Studies asking humans to evaluate text often rate different aspects separately, such as 'adequacy', 'fluency' and 'informa- tiveness' of the text (Hovy, 1999;Papineni et al., 2002b) Our evaluation focuses on adequacy. We did not consider fluency because 4 out of the 5 proposed responses to each context were generated by a human. We did not consider informativeness be- cause in the domains considered, it is not necessarily important (in Twitter), or else it seems to correlate highly with adequacy (in Ubuntu).Survey Results. We present correlation results be- tween the human judgements and each metric in Ta- ble 3. We compute the Pearson correlation, which estimates linear correlation, and Spearman correla- tion, which estimates any monotonic correlation.The first observation is that in both domains the BLEU-4 score, which has previously been used to evaluate unsupervised dialogue systems, shows very weak if any correlation with human judgement. In fact we found that the BLEU-3 and BLEU-4 scores were near-zero for a majority of response pairs; for BLEU-4, only four examples had a score &gt; 10 −9 . Despite this, they still correlate with human judge- ments on the Twitter Corpus at a rate similar to BLEU-2. This is because of the smoothing con- stant, which gives a tiny weight to unigrams and bi- grams despite the absence of higher-order n-grams. BLEU-3 and BLEU-4 behave as a scaled, noisy ver- sion of BLEU-2; thus, if one is to evaluate dialogue Context of Conversation A: dearest! question. how many thousands of people can panaad occupy? B: @user panaad has &lt;number&gt; k seat capacity while rizal has &lt;number&gt; k thats why they choose rizal i think . Ground Truth Response A: now i know about the siting capacity . thanks for the info @user great evening. Proposed Response A: @user makes sense. thanks!A: never felt more sad than i am now B: @user aww why ? A: @user @user its a long story ! sure you wanna know it ? bahaha and thanks for caring btw &lt;heart&gt; Ground Truth Response A: @user i don 't mind to hear it i 've got all day and youre welcome &lt;number&gt; Proposed Response A: @user i know , i 'm just so happy for you ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! Figure 2: Examples where the metrics rated the response poorly and humans rated it highly (left), and the converse (right). Both responses are given near-zero score by BLEU-N for N&gt; 1. While no metric will perform perfectly on all examples, we present these examples to provide intuition on how example-level errors become aggregated into poor correlation to human judgements at the corpus-level.responses with BLEU, we recommend the choice of N = 2 over N = 3 or 4. Note that using a test cor- pus larger than the size reported in this paper may lead to stronger correlations for BLEU-3 and BLEU- 4, due to a higher number of non-zero scores.It is interesting to note that, while some of the em- bedding metrics and BLEU show small positive cor- relation in the non-technical Twitter domain, there is no metric that significantly correlates with hu- mans on the Ubuntu Dialogue Corpus. This is likely because the correct Ubuntu responses contain spe- cific technical words that are less likely to be pro- duced by our models. Further, it is possible that re- sponses in the Ubuntu Dialogue Corpus have intrin- sically higher variability (or entropy) than Twitter when conditioned on the context, making the eval- uation problem significantly more difficult. Figure 1 illustrates the relationship between met- rics and human judgements. We include only the best performing metric using word-overlaps, i.e. the BLEU-2 score (left), and the best performing met- ric using word embeddings, i.e. the vector average (center). These plots show how weak the correlation is: in both cases, they appear to be random noise. It seems as though the BLEU score obtains a pos- itive correlation because of the large number of re- sponses that are given a score of 0 (bottom left cor- ner of the first plot). This is in stark contrast to the inter-rater agreement, which is plotted between two randomly sampled halves of the raters (right-most plots). We also calculated the BLEU scores after removing stopwords and punctuation from the re- sponses. As shown in Table 4, this weakens the cor- relation with human judgements for BLEU-2 com- pared to the values in Table 3, and suggests that BLEU is sensitive to factors that do not change the semantics of the response.Finally, we examined the effect of response length on the metrics, by considering changes in scores when the ground truth and proposed response had a large difference in word counts. Table 4 shows that BLEU and METEOR are particularly sensitive to this aspect, compared to the Embedding Average metric and human judgement.Qualitative Analysis. In order to determine specifically why the metrics fail, we examine qual- itative samples where there is a disagreement be- tween the metrics and human rating. Although these only show inconsistencies at the example-level, they provide some intuition as to why the metrics don't correlate with human judgements at the corpus- level. We present in Figure 2 two examples where all of the embedding-based metrics and BLEU-1 score the proposed response significantly differently than the humans.The left of Figure 2 shows an example where the embedding-based metrics score the proposed re- sponse lowly, while humans rate it highly. It is clear from the context that the proposed response is reasonable -indeed both responses intend to ex- press gratitude. However, the proposed response has a different wording than the ground truth re- sponse, and therefore the metrics are unable to sep- arate the salient words from the rest. This sug- gests that the embedding-based metrics would ben- efit from a weighting of word saliency.The right of the figure shows the reverse scenario: the embedding-based metrics score the proposed re- sponse highly, while humans do not. This is most likely due to the frequently occurring 'i' token, and the fact that 'happy' and 'welcome' may be close together in the embedding space. However, from a human perspective there is a significant semantic difference between the responses as they pertain to the context. Metrics that take into account the con- text may be required in order to differentiate these responses. Note that in both responses in Figure 2, there are no overlapping n-grams greater than un- igrams between the ground truth and proposed re- sponses; thus, all of BLEU-2,3,4 would assign a score near 0 to the response. there is no standard method for doing this in the lit- erature. Future work should examine how retriev- ing additional responses affects the correlation with word-overlap metrics.We have shown that many metrics commonly used in the literature for evaluating unsupervised dialogue systems do not correlate strongly with human judge- ment. Here we elaborate on important issues arising from our analysis.Constrained tasks. Our analysis focuses on rela- tively unconstrained domains. Other work, which separates the dialogue system into a dialogue plan- ner and a natural language generation component for applications in constrained domains, may find stronger correlations with the BLEU metric. For ex- ample, Wen et al. (2015) propose a model to map from dialogue acts to natural language sentences and use BLEU to evaluate the quality of the generated sentences. Since the mapping from dialogue acts to natural language sentences has lower diversity and is more similar to the machine translation task, it seems likely that BLEU will correlate better with human judgements. However, an empirical inves- tigation is still necessary to justify this.Incorporating multiple responses. Our correla- tion results assume that only one ground truth re- sponse is available given each context. Indeed, this is the common setting in most of the recent literature on training end-to-end conversation models. There has been some work on using a larger set of auto- matically retrieved plausible responses when evalu- ating with BLEU ( Galley et al., 2015b). However, Searching for suitable metrics. While we pro- vide evidence against existing metrics, we do not yet provide good alternatives for unsupervised eval- uation. Despite the poor performance of the word embedding-based metrics in this survey, we believe that metrics based on distributed sentence represen- tations hold the most promise for the future. This is because word-overlap metrics will simply require too many ground-truth responses to find a significant match for a reasonable response, due to the high di- versity of dialogue responses. As a simple example, the skip-thought vectors of Kiros et al. (2015) could be considered. Since the embedding-based metrics in this paper only consist of basic averages of vectors obtained through distributional semantics, they are insufficiently complex for modeling sentence-level compositionality in dialogue. Instead, these metrics can be interpreted as calculating the topicality of a proposed response (i.e. how on-topic the proposed response is, compared to the ground-truth).All of the metrics considered in this paper directly compare a proposed response to the ground-truth, without considering the context of the conversation. However, metrics that take into account the context could also be considered. Such metrics could come in the form of an evaluation model that is learned from data. This model could be either a discrim- inative model that attempts to distinguish between model and human responses, or a model that uses data collected from the human survey in order to provide human-like scores to proposed responses. Finally, we must consider the hypothesis that learn- ing such models from data is no easier than solving the problem of dialogue response generation. If this hypothesis is true, we must concede and always use human evaluations together with metrics that only roughly approximate human judgements.
