While computer and communication technologies have pro- vided effective means to scale up many aspects of education, the submission and grading of assessments such as homework assignments and tests remains a weak link. In this paper, we study the problem of automatically grading the kinds of open response mathematical questions that figure prominently in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) courses. Our data-driven framework for mathematical lan- guage processing (MLP) leverages solution data from a large number of learners to evaluate the correctness of their solu- tions, assign partial-credit scores, and provide feedback to each learner on the likely locations of any errors. MLP takes inspiration from the success of natural language processing for text data and comprises three main steps. First, we con- vert each solution to an open response mathematical ques- tion into a series of numerical features. Second, we clus- ter the features from several solutions to uncover the struc- tures of correct, partially correct, and incorrect solutions. We develop two different clustering approaches, one that lever- ages generic clustering algorithms and one based on Bayesian nonparametrics. Third, we automatically grade the remain- ing (potentially large number of) solutions based on their as- signed cluster and one instructor-provided grade per cluster. As a bonus, we can track the cluster assignment of each step of a multistep solution and determine when it departs from a cluster of correct solutions, which enables us to indicate the likely locations of errors to learners. We test and validate MLP on real-world MOOC data to demonstrate how it can substantially reduce the human effort required in large-scale educational platforms.Large-scale educational platforms have the capability to rev- olutionize education by providing inexpensive, high-quality learning opportunities for millions of learners worldwide. Examples of such platforms include massive open online courses (MOOCs) [6,7,9,10,16,42], intelligent tutoring systems [43], computer-based homework and testing systems [1,31,38,40], and personalized learning systems [24]. While computer and communication technologies have provided ef- fective means to scale up the number of learners viewing lectures (via streaming video), reading the textbook (via the web), interacting with simulations (via a graphical user in- terface), and engaging in discussions (via online forums), the submission and grading of assessments such as homework as- signments and tests remains a weak link.There is a pressing need to find new ways and means to au- tomate two critical tasks that are typically handled by the in- structor or course assistants in a small-scale course: (i) grad- ing of assessments, including allotting partial credit for par- tially correct solutions, and (ii) providing individualized feed- back to learners on the locations and types of their errors.In this paper, we study the problem of automatically grading the kinds of open response mathematical questions that fig- ure prominently in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) education. To the best of our knowledge, there exist no tools to automatically evaluate and allot partial- credit scores to the solutions of such questions. As a result, large-scale education platforms have resorted either to over- simplified multiple choice input and binary grading schemes (correct/incorrect), which are known to convey less informa- tion about the learners' knowledge than open response ques- tions [17], or peer-grading schemes [25,26], which shift the burden of grading from the course instructor to the learners. First, we convert each solution to an open response mathe- matical question into a series of numerical features. In deriv- ing these features, we make use of symbolic mathematics to transform mathematical expressions into a canonical form. Second, we cluster the features from several solutions to un- cover the structures of correct, partially correct, and incorrect solutions. We develop two different clustering approaches. MLP-S uses the numerical features to define a similarity score between pairs of solutions and then applies a generic cluster- ing algorithm, such as spectral clustering (SC) [22] or affinity propagation (AP) [11]. We show that MLP-S is also useful for visualizing mathematical solutions. This can help instruc- tors identify groups of learners that make similar errors so that instructors can deliver personalized remediation. MLP-B defines a nonparametric Bayesian model for the solutions and applies a Gibbs sampling algorithm to cluster the solutions. Figure 1: Example solutions to the question "Find the deriva- tive of (x 3 + sin x)/e x " that were assigned scores of 3, 2, 1 and 0 out of 3, respectively, by our MLP-B algorithm.Third, once a human assigns a grade to at least one solution in each cluster, we automatically grade the remaining (po- tentially large number of) solutions based on their assigned cluster. As a bonus, in MLP-B, we can track the cluster as- signment of each step in a multistep solution and determine when it departs from a cluster of correct solutions, which en- ables us to indicate the likely locations of errors to learners.In developing MLP, we tackle three main challenges of ana- lyzing open response mathematical solutions. First, solutions might contain different notations that refer to the same math- ematical quantity. For instance, in Figure 1, the learners use both e −x and  In this paper, we develop a data-driven framework for math- ematical language processing (MLP) that leverages solution data from a large number of learners to evaluate the correct- ness of solutions to open response mathematical questions, assign partial-credit scores, and provide feedback to each learner on the likely locations of any errors. The scope of our framework is broad and covers questions whose solution in- volves one or more mathematical expressions. This includes not just formal proofs but also the kinds of mathematical cal- culations that figure prominently in science and engineering courses. Examples of solutions to two algebra questions of various levels of correctness are given in Figures 1 and 2. In this regard, our work differs significantly from that of [8], which focuses exclusively on evaluating logical proofs. e x to refer to the same quantity. Second, some questions admit more than one path to the correct/incorrect solution. For instance, in Figure 2 we see two different yet correct solutions to the same question. It is typically infea- sible for an instructor to enumerate all of these possibilities to automate the grading and feedback process. Third, numer- ically verifying the correctness of the solutions does not al- ways apply to mathematical questions, especially when sim- plifications are required. For example, a question that asks to simplify the expression sin 2 x+cos 2 x+x can have both 1+x and sin 2 x + cos 2 x + x as numerically correct answers, since both these expressions output the same value for all values of x. However, the correct answer is 1+x, since the question ex- pects the learners to recognize that sin 2 x+cos 2 x = 1. Thus, methods developed to check the correctness of computer pro- grams and formulae by specifying a range of different inputs and checking for the correct outputs, e.g., [32], cannot always be applied to accurately grade open response mathematical questions.Our MLP framework, which is inspired by the success of NLP methods for the analysis of textual solutions (e.g., es- says and short answer), comprises three main steps.Prior work has led to a number of methods for grading and providing feedback to the solutions of certain kinds of open response questions. A linear regression-based approach has been developed to grade essays using features extracted from a training corpus using Natural Language Processing (NLP) [1,33]. Unfortunately, such a simple regression-based model does not perform well when applied to the features extracted from mathematical solutions. Several methods have been de- veloped for automated analysis of computer programs [15,32]. However, these methods do not apply to the solutions to open response mathematical questions, since they lack the structure and compilability of computer programs. Several methods have also been developed to check the correctness of the logic in mathematical proofs [8,19,21]. However, these methods apply only to mathematical proofs involving logical operations and not the kinds of open-ended mathematical cal- culations that are often involved in science and engineering courses.MLP identifies the unique mathematical expressions con- tained in the learners' solutions and uses them as features, effectively extending the bag-of-words model to use mathe- matical expressions as features rather than words. To coin a phrase, MLP uses a novel bag-of-expressions model.The idea of clustering solutions to open response questions into groups of similar solutions has been used in a number of previous endeavors: [2,5] uses clustering to grade short, textual answers to simple questions; [23] uses clustering to visualize a large collection of computer programs; and [28] uses clustering to grade and provide feedback on computer programs. Although the high-level concept underlying these works is resonant with the MLP framework, the feature build- ing techniques used in MLP are very different, since the struc- ture of mathematical solutions differs significantly from short textual answers and computer programs. This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we develop our approach to convert open response mathemati- cal solutions to numerical features that can be processed by machine learning algorithms. We then develop MLP-S and MLP-B and use real-world MOOC data to showcase their ability to accurately grade a large number of solutions based on the instructor's grades for only a small number of solu- tions, thus substantially reducing the human effort required in large-scale educational platforms. We close with a discus- sion and perspectives on future research directions.Once the mathematical expressions have been extracted from a solution, we parse them using SymPy, the open source Python library for symbolic mathematics [36].2 SymPy has powerful capability for simplifying expressions. For exam- ple, x 2 + x 2 can be simplified to 2x 2 , and e x x 2 /e 2x can be simplifed to e −x x 2 . In this way, we can identify the equiva- lent terms in expressions that refer to the same mathematical quantity, resulting in more accurate features. In practice for some questions, however, it might be necessary to tone down the level of SymPy's simplification. For instance, the key to solving the question in Figure 2 is to simplify the expression using the Pythagorean identity sin 2 x + cos 2 x = 1. If SymPy is called on to perform such a simplification automatically, then it will not be possible to verify whether a learner has cor- rectly navigated the simplification in their solution. For such problems, it is advisable to perform only arithmetic simplifi- cations.After extracting the expressions from the solutions, we trans- form the expressions into numerical features. We assume that N learners submit solutions to a particular mathemati- cal question. Extracting the expressions from each solution using SymPy yields a total of V unique expressions across the N solutions.The first step in our MLP framework is to transform a collec- tion of solutions to an open response mathematical question into a set of numerical features. In later sections, we show how the numerical features can be used to cluster and grade solutions as well as generate informative learner feedback.We encode the solutions in a integer-valued solution feature matrix Y ∈ N V ×N whose rows correspond to different ex- pressions and whose columns correspond to different solu- tions; that is, the (i, j) th entry of Y is given byA solution to an open response mathematical question will in general contain a mixture of explanatory text and core math- ematical expressions. Since the correctness of a solution de- pends primarily on the mathematical expressions, we will ig- nore the text when deriving features. However, we recognize that the text is potentially very useful for automatically gener- ating explanations for various mathematical expressions. We leave this avenue for future work.Each column of Y corresponds to a numerical representation of a mathematical solution. Note that we do not consider the ordering of the expressions in this model; such an extension is an interesting avenue for future work. In this paper, we indicate in Y only the presence and not the frequency of an expression, i.e., Y ∈ {0, 1} V ×N andThe extension to encoding frequencies is straightforward.A workhorse of NLP is the bag-of-words model; it has found tremendous success in text semantic analysis. This model treats a text document as a collection of words and uses the frequencies of the words as numerical features to perform tasks like topic classification and document clustering [4,5]. x that are all separated by the delimiter "=".To illustrate how the matrix Y is constructed, consider the solutions in Figure 2 We end this section with the crucial observation that, for a wide range of mathematical questions, many expressions will be shared across learners' solutions. This is true, for instance, in Figure 2. This suggests that there are a limited number of types of solutions to a question (both correct and incorrect) and that solutions of the same type tend tend to be similar to each other. This leads us to the conclusion that the N solu- tions to a particular question can be effectively clustered into K N clusters. In the next two sections, we will develop MLP-S and MLP-B, two algorithms to cluster solutions ac- cording to their numerical features.belong to the same cluster. For each figure, we show a sam- ple solution from some of these clusters, with the boxed solu- tions corresponding to correct solutions. We can make three interesting observations from Figure 3: Although the later solution is incorrect, it contained a typographical error where 3 * x ∧ 2 was typed as 3 ∧ x ∧ 2. MLP-S is able to identify this typographical error, since the expres- sion before the final solution is contained in several other correct solutions.In this section, we outline MLP-S, which clusters and then grades solutions using a solution similarity-based approach. The We start by using the solution features in Y to define a notion of similarity between pairs of solutions. Define the N × N similarity matrix S containing the pairwise similarities be- tween all solutions, with its (i, j) th entry the similarity be- tween solutions i and j• In the top right figure, the correct solution requires iden- tifying the trigonometric identify sin 2 x + cos 2 x = 1. The clustering algorithm is able to identify a subset of the learners who were not able to identify this relationship and hence could not simplify their final expression.• MLP-S is able to identify solutions that are strongly con- nected to each other. Such a visualization can be extremely useful for course instructors. For example, an instructor can easily identify a group of learners who lack mastery of a certain skill that results in a common error and adjust their course plan accordingly to help these learners.The column vector y i denotes the i th column of Y and corre- sponds to learner i's solution. Informally, S i,j is the number of common expressions between solution i and solution j di- vided by the minimum of the number of expressions in solu- tions i and j. A large/small value of S i,j corresponds to the two solutions being similar/dissimilar. For example, the sim- ilarity between the solutions in Figure 1(a) and Figure 1(b) is 1/3 and the similarity between the solutions in Figure 2(a) and Figure 2(b) is 1/2. S is symmetric, and 0 ≤ S i,j ≤ 1. Equation (2) is just one of any possible solution similarity metrics. We defer the development of other metrics to future work.Auto-Grading via MLP-S Having clustered all solutions into a small number K of clus- ters, we assign the same grade to all solutions in the same cluster. If a course instructor assigns a grade to one solution from each cluster, then MLP-S can automatically grade the remaining N − K solutions. We construct the index set I S of solutions that the course instructor needs to grade asClustering Solutions in MLP-S Having defined the similarity S i,j between two solutions i and j, we now cluster the N solutions into K N clusters such that the solutions within each cluster have high similarity score between them and solutions in different clusters have low similarity score between them.where C k represents the index set of the solutions in cluster k. In words, in each cluster, we select the solution having the highest similarity to the other solutions (ties are broken randomly) to include in I S . We demonstrate the performance of auto-grading via MLP-S in the experimental results section below.Given the similarity matrix S, we can use any of the mul- titude of standard clustering algorithms to cluster solutions. Two examples of clustering algorithms are spectral cluster- ing (SC) [22] and affinity propagation (AP) [11]. The SC algorithm requires specifying the number of clusters K as an input parameter, while the AP algorithm does not.In this section, we outline MLP-B, which clusters and then grades solutions using a Bayesian nonparameterics-based ap- proach. The MLP-B model and algorithm can be interpreted as an extension of the model in [44], where a similar approach is proposed to cluster short text documents. Figure 3 illustrates how AP is able to identify clusters of sim- ilar solutions from solutions to four different mathematical questions. The figures on the top correspond to solutions to the questions in Figures 1 and 2, respectively. The bottom two figures correspond to solutions to two signal processing questions. Each node in the figure corresponds to a solution, and nodes with the same color correspond to solutions that The Following the key observation that the N solutions can be effectively clustered into K N clusters, let z be the N × 1 cluster assignment vector, with z j ∈ {1, . . . , K} denoting the cluster assignment of the j th solution with j ∈ {1, . . . , N }. Using this latent variable, we model the probability of the Figure 3: Illustration of the clusters obtained by MLP-S by applying affinity propagation (AP) on the similarity matrix S corre- sponding to learners' solutions to four different mathematical questions (see Table 1 for more details about the datasets and the Appendix for the question statements). Each node corresponds to a solution. Nodes with the same color correspond to solutions that are estimated to be in the same cluster. The thickness of the edge between two solutions is proportional to their similarity score. Boxed solutions are correct; all others are in varying degrees of correctness. solution of all learners' solutions to the question as N of Φ and charcterizes the multinomial distribution over all the V features for cluster k.where y j , the j th column of the data matrix Y, corresponds to learner j's solution to the question. Here we have implicitly assumed that the learners' solutions are independent of each other. By analogy to topic models [4,35], we assume that learner j's solution to the question, y j , is generated according to a multinomial distribution given the cluster assignments z asIn practice, one often has no information regarding the num- ber of clusters K. Therefore, we consider K as an unknown parameter and infer it from the solution data. In order to do so, we impose a Chinese restaurant process (CRP) prior on the cluster assignments z, parameterized by a parameter α. The CRP characterizes the random partition of data into clus- ters, in analogy to the seating process of customers in a Chi- nese restaurant. It is widely used in Bayesian mixture model- ing literature [3,14]. Under the CRP prior, the cluster (table) assignment of the j th solution (customer), conditioned on the cluster assignments of all the other solutions, follows the dis- tribution If a cluster becomes empty after we remove a solution from its current cluster, then we remove it from our sampling process and erase its corresponding multinomial parame- ter vector φ k . If a new cluster is sampled for z j , then we sample its multinomial parameter vector φ k immediately according to Step 2 below. Otherwise, we do not change φ k until we have finished sampling z for all solutions.where n k,¬j represents the number of solutions that belong to cluster k excluding the current solution j, with K k=1 n k,¬j = N − 1. The vector z ¬j represents the cluster assignments of the other solutions. The flexibility of allowing any solution to start a new cluster of its own enables us to automatically in- fer K from data. It is known [37] that the expected number of clusters under the CRP prior satisfies K ∼ O(α logN ) N , so our method scales well as the number of learners N grows large. We also impose a Gamma prior α ∼ Gam(α α , α β ) on α to help us infer its value.2. Sample Φ: For each cluster k, sample φ k from its pos- terior Dir(φ k |n 1,k + β, . . . , n V,k + β), where n i,k is the number of times feature i occurs in the solutions that be- long to cluster k.3. Sample α: Sample α using the approach described in [41].4. Update β: Update β using the fixed-point procedure de- scribed in [20].Since the solution feature data Y is assumed to follow a multi- nomial distribution parameterized by Φ, we impose a sym- metric Dirichlet prior over Φ as φ k ∼ Dir(φ k |β) because of its conjugacy with the multinomial distribution [13].The graphical model representation of our model is visualized in Figure 4. Our goal next is to estimate the cluster assign- ments z for the solution of each learner, the parameters φ k of each cluster, and the number of clusters K, from the binary- valued solution feature data matrix Y.The output of the Gibbs sampler is a series of samples that correspond to the approximate posterior distribution of the various parameters of interest. To make meaningful infer- ence for these parameters (such as the posterior mean of a pa- rameter), it is important to appropriately post-process these samples. For our estimate of the true number of clusters, K, we simply take the mode of the posterior distribution on the number of clusters K. We use only iterations with K = K to estimate the posterior statistics [39].We use a Gibbs sampling algorithm for posterior inference under the MLP-B model, which automatically groups solu- tions into clusters. We start by applying a generic clustering algorithm (e.g., K-means, with K = N/10) to initialize z, and then initialize Φ accordingly. Then, in each iteration of MLP-B, we perform the following steps:1. Sample z: For each solution j, we remove it from its cur- rent cluster and sample its cluster assignment z j from the posterior p(z j = k|z ¬j , α, Y). Using Bayes rule, we haveIn mixture models, the issue of "label-switching" can cause a model to be unidentifiable, because the cluster labels can be arbitrarily permuted without affecting the data likelihood. In order to overcome this issue, we use an approach reported in [39]. First, we compute the likelihood of the observed data in each iteration as p(Y|Φ , z ), where Φ and z represent the samples of these variables at the th iteration. After the algorithm terminates, we search for the iteration max with the largest data likelihood and then permute the labels z in the other iterations to best match Φ with Φ . We use Φ (with columnsˆφcolumnsˆ columnsˆφ k ) to denote the estimate of Φ, which is simply the posterior mean of Φ. Each solution j is assigned to the cluster indexed by the mode of the samples from the posterior of z j , denoted byˆzbyˆ byˆz j .The prior probability p(z j = k|z ¬j , α) is given by (4). For non-empty clusters, the observed data likelihood p(y j |z j = k, φ k ) is given by (3). However, this does not apply to new clusters that are previously empty. For a new cluster, we marginalize out φ k , resulting in p(y j |z j = k, β) = Auto-Grading via MLP-B We now detail how to use MLP-B to automatically grade a large number N of learners' solutions to a mathematical ques- tion, using a small number K of instructor graded solutions. First, as in MLP-S, we select the set I B of "typical solutions" for the instructor to grade. We construct I B by selecting one solution from each of the K clusters that is most representa- tive of the solutions in that cluster:In words, for each cluster, we select the solution with the largest likelihood of being in that cluster.The instructor grades the K solutions in I B to form the set of instructor grades {g k } for k ∈ I B . Using these grades, we assign grades to the other solutions j / ∈ I B according to K Feedback Generation via MLP-B In addition to grading solutions, MLP-B can automatically provide useful feedback to learners on where they made errors in their solutions.For a particular solution j denoted by its column feature value vector y j with V j total expressions, let y (v) j denote the feature value vector that corresponds to the first v ex- pressions of this solution, with v = {1, 2, . . . , V j }. Un- der this notation, we evaluate the probability that the first v expressions of solution j belong to each of the K clusters: p(y of questions includes 2 high-school level mathematical ques- tions and 2 college-level signal processing questions (details about the questions can be found in Table 1, and the question statements are given in the Appendix). For each question, we pre-process the solutions to filter out the blank solutions and extract features. Using the features, we represent the solu- tions by the matrix Y in (1). Every solution was graded by the course instructor with one of the scores in the set {0, 1, 2, 3}, with a full credit of 3.Baseline: Random sub-sampling. . , K}, for all v. Using these proba- bilities, we can also compute the expected credit of solution j after the first v expressions via Kwhere {g k } is the set of instructor grades as defined above.We compare the auto-grading performance of MLP-S and MLP-B against a baseline method that does not group the so- lutions into clusters. In this method, we randomly sub-sample all solutions to form a small set of solutions for the instructor to grade. Then, each ungraded solution is simply assigned the grade of the solution in the set of instructor-graded solutions that is most similar to it as defined by S in (2). Since this small set is picked randomly, we run the baseline method 10 times and report the best performance.Using these quantities, it is possible to identify that the learner has likely made an error at the v th expression if it is most likely to belong to a cluster with credit g k less than the full credit or, alternatively, if the expected creditˆgcreditˆ creditˆg For each question, we apply four different methods for auto- grading:The ability to automatically locate where an error has been made in a particular incorrect solution provides many bene- fits. For instance, MLP-B can inform instructors of the most common locations of learner errors to help guide their instruc- tion. It can also enable an automated tutoring system to gen- erate feedback to a learner as they make an error in the early steps of a solution, before it propagates to later steps. We demonstrate the efficacy of MLP-B to automatically locate learner errors using real-world educational data in the exper- iments section below.• Random sub-sampling (RS) with the number of clusters K ∈ {5, 6, . . . , 40}.• MLP-S with spectral clustering (SC) with K ∈ {5, 6, . . . , 40}.• MLP-S with affinity propagation (AP) clustering. This al- gorithm does not require K as an input.• MLP-B with hyperparameters set to the non-informative values α α = α β = 1 and running the Gibbs sampling al- gorithm for 10,000 iterations with 2,000 burn-in iterations.In this section, we demonstrate how MLP-S and MLP-B can be used to accurately estimate the grades of roughly 100 open response solutions to mathematical questions by only asking the course instructor to grade approximately 10 solutions. We also demonstrate how MLP-B can be used to automatically provide feedback to learners on the locations of errors in their solutions.MLP-S with AP and MLP-B both automatically estimate the number of clusters K. Once the clusters are selected, we as- sign one solution from each cluster to be graded by the in- structor using the methods described in earlier sections.We use mean absolute error (MAE), which measures the "av- erage absolute error per auto-graded solution"Auto-Grading via MLP-S and MLP-BOur dataset that consists of 116 learners solving 4 open re- sponse mathematical questions in an edX course. The set as our performance metric. Here, N − K equals the num- ber of solutions that are auto-graded, andˆgandˆ andˆg j and g j repre- sent the estimated grade (for MLP-B, the estimated grades are rounded to integers) and the actual instructor grades for the auto-graded solutions, respectively. In Figure 5, we plot the MAE versus the number of clusters K for Questions 1-4. MLP-S with SC consistently outper- forms the random sampling baseline algorithm for almost all values of K. This performance gain is likely due to the fact that the baseline method does not cluster the solutions and thus does not select a good subset of solutions for the instruc- tor to grade. MLP-B is more accurate than MLP-S with both SC and AP and can automatically estimate the value of K, al- though at the price of significantly higher computational com- plexity (e.g., clustering and auto-grading one question takes 2 minutes for MLP-B compared to only 5 seconds for MLP-S with AP on a standard laptop computer with a 2.8GHz CPU and 8GB memory). Both MLP-S and MLP-B grade the learners' solutions accu- rately (e.g., an MAE of 0.04 out of the full grade 3 using only K = 13 instructor grades to auto-grade all N = 113 solu- tions to Question 2). Moreover, as we see in Figure 5, the MAE for MLP-S decreases as K increases, and eventually reaches 0 when K is large enough that only solutions that are exactly the same as each other belong to the same cluster. In practice, one can tune the value of K to achieve a balance be- tween maximizing grading accuracy and minimizing human effort. Such a tuning process is not necessary for MLP-B, since it automatically estimates the value of K and achieves such a balance. Feedback Generation via MLP-BSince Questions 3-4 require some familiarity with signal pro- cessing, we demonstrate the efficacy of MLP-B in provid- ing feedback on mathematical solutions on Questions 1-2. Among the solutions to each question, there are a few types of common errors that more than one learner makes. We take one incorrect solution out of each type and run MLP-B on the other solutions to estimate the parameterˆφparameterˆ parameterˆφ k for each clus- ter. Using this information and the instructor grades {g k }, after each expression v in a solution, we compute the proba- bility that it belongs to a cluster p(y (v) j | ˆ φ k ) that does not have full credit (g k &lt; 3), together with the expected credit using (6). Once the expected grade is calculated to be less than full credit, we consider that an error has occurred.We have developed a framework for mathematical language processing (MLP) that consists of three main steps: (i) con- verting each solution to an open response mathematical ques- tion into a series of numerical features; (ii) clustering the fea- tures from several solutions to uncover the structures of cor- rect, partially correct, and incorrect solutions; and (iii) auto- matically grading the remaining (potentially large number of) solutions based on their assigned cluster and one instructor- provided grade per cluster. As our experiments have indi- cated, our framework can substantially reduce the human ef- fort required for grading in large-scale courses. As a bonus, MLP-S enables instructors to visualize the clusters of solu- tions to help them identify common errors and thus groups of learners having the same misconceptions. As a further bonus, MLP-B can track the cluster assignment of each step of a mul- tistep solution and determine when it departs from a cluster of correct solutions, which enables us to indicate the locations of errors to learners in real time. Improved learning outcomes should result from these innovations.Two sample feedback generation process are shown in Fig- ure 6. In Figure 6(a), we can provide feedback to the learner on their error as early as Line 2, before it carries over to later lines. Thus, MLP-B can potentially become a powerful tool to generate timely feedback to learners as they are solving mathematical questions, by analyzing the solutions it gathers from other learners.There are several avenues for continued research. We are cur- rently planning more extensive experiments on the edX plat- form involving tens of thousands of learners. We are also planning to extend the feature extraction step to take into ac- count both the ordering of expressions and ancillary text in a solution. Clustering algorithms that allow a solution to be- long to more than one cluster could make MLP more robust to outlier solutions and further reduce the number of solutions that the instructors need to grade. Finally, it would be inter- esting to explore how the features of solutions could be used
