Visual recognition tasks involving language, such as captioning ( Vinyals et al., 2015), visual ques- tion answering ( Antol et al., 2015), and visual se- mantic role labeling ( Yatskar et al., 2016), have emerged as avenues for expanding the diversity of information that can be recovered from im- ages. These tasks aim at extracting rich seman- tics from images and require large quantities of la- beled data, predominantly retrieved from the web. Methods often combine structured prediction and deep learning to model correlations between la- bels and images to make judgments that otherwise would have weak visual support. For example, in the first image of Figure 1, it is possible to pre- dict a spatula by considering that it is a com- mon tool used for the activity cooking. Yet such methods run the risk of discovering and exploiting societal biases present in the underlying web cor- pora. Without properly quantifying and reducing the reliance on such correlations, broad adoption of these models can have the inadvertent effect of magnifying stereotypes.In this paper, we develop a general framework for quantifying bias and study two concrete tasks, visual semantic role labeling (vSRL) and multil- abel object classification (MLC). In vSRL, we use the imSitu formalism ( Yatskar et al., 2016Yatskar et al., , 2017, where the goal is to predict activities, objects and the roles those objects play within an activity. For MLC, we use MS-COCO ( Lin et al., 2014;Chen et al., 2015), a recognition task covering 80 object classes. We use gender bias as a running example and show that both supporting datasets for these tasks are biased with respect to a gender binary 1 .Our analysis reveals that over 45% and 37% of verbs and objects, respectively, exhibit bias to- ward a gender greater than 2:1. For example, as seen in Figure 1, the cooking activity in imSitu is a heavily biased verb. Furthermore, we show that after training state-of-the-art structured pre- dictors, models amplify the existing bias, by 5.0% for vSRL, and 3.6% in MLC.  Figure 1: Five example images from the imSitu visual semantic role labeling (vSRL) dataset. Each im- age is paired with a table describing a situation: the verb, cooking, its semantic roles, i.e agent, and noun values filling that role, i.e. woman. In the imSitu training set, 33% of cooking images have man in the agent role while the rest have woman. After training a Conditional Random Field (CRF), bias is amplified: man fills 16% of agent roles in cooking images. To reduce this bias amplification our cal- ibration method adjusts weights of CRF potentials associated with biased predictions. After applying our methods, man appears in the agent role of 20% of cooking images, reducing the bias amplification by 25%, while keeping the CRF vSRL performance unchanged.To mitigate the role of bias amplification when training models on biased corpora, we propose a novel constrained inference framework, called RBA, for Reducing Bias Amplification in predic- tions. Our method introduces corpus-level con- straints so that gender indicators co-occur no more often together with elements of the prediction task than in the original training distribution. For ex- ample, as seen in Figure 1, we would like noun man to occur in the agent role of the cooking as often as it occurs in the imSitu training set when evaluating on a development set. We combine our calibration constraint with the original struc- tured predictor and use Lagrangian relaxation (Korte and Vygen, 2008;Rush and Collins, 2012) to reweigh bias creating factors in the original model.We evaluate our calibration method on imSitu vSRL and COCO MLC and find that in both in- stances, our models substantially reduce bias am- plification. For vSRL, we reduce the average mag- nitude of bias amplification by 40.5%. For MLC, we are able to reduce the average magnitude of bias amplification by 47.5%. Overall, our calibra- tion methods do not affect the performance of the underlying visual system, while substantially re- ducing the reliance of the system on socially bi- ased correlations 2 .As intelligence systems start playing important roles in our daily life, ethics in artificial in- telligence research has attracted significant in- terest. It is known that big-data technologies sometimes inadvertently worsen discrimination due to implicit biases in data ( Podesta et al., 2014). Such issues have been demonstrated in var- ious learning systems, including online advertise- ment systems (Sweeney, 2013), word embedding models ( Bolukbasi et al., 2016;Caliskan et al., 2017), online news ( Ross and Carter, 2011), web search ( Kay et al., 2015), and credit score (Hardt et al., 2016). Data collection biases have been discussed in the context of creating image cor- pus ( Misra et al., 2016;van Miltenburg, 2016) and text corpus (Gordon and Van Durme, 2013;Van Durme, 2010). In contrast, we show that given a gender biased corpus, structured models such as conditional random fields, amplify the bias.The effect of the data imbalance can be easily detected and fixed when the prediction task is sim- ple. For example, when classifying binary data with unbalanced labels (i.e., samples in the major- ity class dominate the dataset), a classifier trained exclusively to optimize accuracy learns to always predict the majority label, as the cost of mak- ing mistakes on samples in the minority class can be neglected. Various approaches have been pro- posed to make a "fair" binary classification (Barocas and Selbst, 2014;Dwork et al., 2012;Feldman et al., 2015;Zliobaite, 2015). For structured pre- diction tasks the effect is harder to quantify and we are the first to propose methods to reduce bias amplification in this context. variable, g, as:Lagrangian relaxation and dual decomposi- tion techniques have been widely used in NLP tasks (e.g., (Sontag et al., 2011;Rush and Collins, 2012;Chang and Collins, 2011;Peng et al., 2015)) for dealing with instance-level constraints. Simi- lar techniques (Chang et al., 2013;Dalvi, 2015) have been applied in handling corpus-level con- straints for semi-supervised multilabel classifica- tion. In contrast to previous works aiming for improving accuracy performance, we incorporate corpus-level constraints for reducing gender bias.where c(o, g) is the number of occurrences of o and g in a corpus. For example, to analyze how genders of agents and activities are co-related in vSRL, we define the gender bias toward man for each verb b(verb, man) as:If b(o, g) &gt; 1/ then o is positively correlated with g and may exhibit bias.Modern statistical learning approaches capture correlations among output variables in order to make coherent predictions. However, for real- world applications, some implicit correlations are not appropriate, especially if they are amplified.In this section, we present a general framework to analyze inherent biases learned and amplified by a prediction model.To evaluate the degree of bias amplification, we propose to com- pare bias scores on the training set, b * (o, g), with bias scores on an unlabeled evaluation set of im- ages˜bages˜ages˜b(o, g) that has been annotated by a predic- tor. We assume that the evaluation set is iden- tically distributed to the training set. There- fore, if o is positively correlated with g (i.e,), we say bias has been amplified. For example, if b * (cooking, woman) = .66, and˜b and˜and˜b(cooking, woman) = .84, then the bias ofIdentifying bias We consider that prediction problems involve several inter-dependent output variables y 1 , y 2 , ...y K , which can be represented as a structure y = {y 1 , y 2 , ...y K } ∈ Y . This is a common setting in NLP applications, includ- ing tagging, and parsing. For example, in the vSRL task, the output can be represented as a structured table as shown in Fig 1. Modern tech- niques often model the correlation between the sub-components in y and make a joint prediction over them using a structured prediction model. More details will be provided in Section 4.woman toward cooking has been amplified. Fi- nally, we define the mean bias amplification as:This score estimates the average magnitude of bias amplification for pairs of o and g which exhibited bias.We assume there is a subset of output vari- ables g ⊆ y, g ∈ G that reflects demographic at- tributes such as gender or race (e.g. g ∈ G = {man, woman} is the agent), and there is another subset of the output o ⊆ y, o ∈ O that are co- related with g (e.g., o is the activity present in an image, such as cooking). The goal is to identify the correlations that are potentially amplified by a learned model. To achieve this, we define the bias score of a given output, o, with respect to a demographic In this section, we introduce Reducing Bias Amplification, RBA, a debiasing technique for calibrating the predictions from a structured pre- diction model. The intuition behind the algorithm is to inject constraints to ensure the model pre- dictions follow the distribution observed from the training data. For example, the constraints added to the vSRL system ensure the gender ratio of each verb in Eq. (1) are within a given margin based on the statistics of the training data. These constraints are applied at the corpus level, because comput- ing gender ratio requires the predictions of all test instances. As a result, a joint inference over test instances is required 3 . Solving such a giant in- ference problem with constraints is hard. There- fore, we present an approximate inference algo- rithm based on Lagrangian relaxation. The advan- tages of this approach are:• Our algorithm is iterative, and at each it- eration, the joint inference problem is de- composed to a per-instance basis. This can be solved by the original inference algo- rithm. That is, our approach works as a meta- algorithm and developers do not need to im- plement a new inference algorithm.represents the overall score of an assignment, and s θ (v, i) and s θ (v, r, i) are the potentials of the sub- assignments. The output space Y contains all fea- sible assignments of y v and y v,r , which can be rep- resented as instance-wise constraints. For exam- ple, the constraint, v y v = 1 ensures only one activity is assigned to one image.• The approach is general and can be applied in any structured model.Corpus-level Constraints Our goal is to inject constraints to ensure the output labels follow a desired distribution. For example, we can set a constraint to ensure the gender ratio for each ac- tivity in Eq. (1) is within a given margin. Let y i = {y i v } ∪ {y i v,r } be the output assignment for test instance i 5 . For each activity v * , the con- straints can be written as• Lagrangian relaxation guarantees the solu- tion is optimal if the algorithm converges and all constraints are satisfied.In practice, it is hard to obtain a solution where all corpus-level constrains are satisfied. However, we show that the performance of the proposed ap- proach is empirically strong. We use imSitu for vSRL as a running example to explain our algo- rithm.Structured Output Prediction As we men- tioned in Sec. 3, we assume the structured output y ∈ Y consists of several sub-components. Given a test instance i as an input, the inference problem is to find arg max y∈Y f θ (y, i),is the desired gender ra- tio of an activity v * , γ is a user-specified margin. M and W are a set of semantic role-values rep- resenting the agent as a man or a woman, respec- tively.Note that the constraints in (2) involve all the test instances. Therefore, it requires a joint in- ference over the entire test corpus. In general, these corpus-level constraints can be represented in a form of A i y i − b ≤ 0, where each row in the matrix A ∈ R l×K is the coefficients of one constraint, and b ∈ R l . The constrained inference problem can then be formulated as:where f θ (y, i) is a scoring function based on a model θ learned from the training data. The struc- tured output y and the scoring function f θ (y, i) can be decomposed into small components based on an independence assumption. For example, in the vSRL task, the output y consists of two types of binary output variables {y v } and {y v,r }. The vari- able y v = 1 if and only if the activity v is chosen. Similarly, y v,r = 1 if and only if both the activity v and the semantic role r are assigned 4 . The scoring function f θ (y, i) is decomposed accordingly such that:i where {Y i } represents a space spanned by possi- ble combinations of labels for all instances. With- out the corpus-level constraints, Eq. (3) can be optimized by maximizing each instance i max f θ (y i , i),3 A sufficiently large sample of test instances must be used so that bias statistics can be estimated. In this work we use the entire test set for each respective problem. 4 We use r to refer to a combination of role and noun. For example, one possible value indicates an agent is a woman.  Table 1. We also provide setup details for our calibration method. Table 1: Statistics for the two recognition prob- lems. In vSRL, we consider gender bias relating to verbs, while in MLC we consider the gender bias related to objects. et al., 1990). The original dataset includes about 125,000 images with 75,702 for training, 25,200 for developing, and 25,200 for test. However, the dataset covers many non-human oriented activities (e.g., rearing, retrieving, and wagging), so we filter out these verbs, resulting in 212 verbs, leaving roughly 60,000 of the original 125,000 im- ages in the dataset. where each potential value in the CRF for subpart x, is computed using features f i from the VGG convolutional neural network (Simonyan and Zis- serman, 2014) on an input image, as follows:where λ (0) = 0. η is the learning rate for updat- ing λ. Note that with a fixed λ (t−1) , Eq. (5) can be solved using the original inference algorithms. The algorithm loops until all constraints are satis- fied (i.e. optimal solution achieved) or reach max- imal number of iterations.where w and b are the parameters of an affine transformation layer. The model explicitly cap- tures the correlation between activities and nouns in semantic roles, allowing it to learn common pri- ors. We use a model pretrained on the original task with 504 verbs.In this section, we provide details about the two vi- sual recognition tasks we evaluated for bias: visual semantic role labeling (vSRL), and multi-label classification (MLC). We focus on gender, defin- ing G = {man, woman} and focus on the agent Dataset We use MS-COCO ( Lin et al., 2014), a common object detection benchmark, for multi- label object classification. The dataset contains 80 object types but does not make gender distinctions between man and woman. We use the five asso- ciated image captions available for each image in this dataset to annotate the gender of people in the images. If any of the captions mention the word man or woman we mark it, removing any images that mention both genders. Finally, we filter any object category not strongly associated with hu- mans by removing objects that do not occur with man or woman at least 100 times in the training set, leaving a total of 66 objects.Model For this multi-label setting, we adapt a similar model as the structured CRF we use for vSRL. We decompose the joint probability of the output y, consisting of all object categories, c, and gender of the person, g, given an image i as:c∈y imSitu is gender biased In Figure 2(a), along the x-axis, we show the male favoring bias of im- Situ verbs. Overall, the dataset is heavily biased toward male agents, with 64.6% of verbs favoring a male agent by an average bias of 0.707 (roughly 3:1 male). Nearly half of verbs are extremely bi- ased in the male or female direction: 46.95% of verbs favor a gender with a bias of at least 0.7. 6 Figure 2(a) contains several activity labels reveal- ing problematic biases. For example, shopping, microwaving and washing are biased toward a female agent. Furthermore, several verbs such as driving, shooting, and coaching are heavily biased toward a male agent.where each potential value for x, is computed us- ing features, f i , from a pretrained ResNet-50 con- volutional neural network evaluated on the image,We trained a model using SGD with learning rate 10 −5 , momentum 0.9 and weight-decay 10 −4 , fine tuning the initial visual network, for 50 epochs.The inference problems for both models are:arg max y∈Y f θ (y, i) = log p(y|i; θ).Training on imSitu amplifies bias In Fig- ure 2(a), along the y-axis, we show the ratio of male agents (% of total people) in predictions on an unseen development set. The mean bias ampli- fication in the development set is high, 0.050 on average, with 45.75% of verbs exhibiting ampli- fication. Biased verbs tend to have stronger am- plification: verbs with training bias over 0.7 in either the male or female direction have a mean amplification of 0.072. Several already problem- atic biases have gotten much worse. For example, serving, only had a small bias toward females in the training set, 0.402, is now heavily biased toward females, 0.122. The verb tuning, origi- nally heavily biased toward males, 0.878, now has exclusively male agents.We use the algorithm in Sec. (4) to calibrate the predictions using model θ. Our calibration tries to enforce gender statistics derived from the training set of corpus applicable for each recognition prob- lem. For all experiments, we try to match gen- der ratios on the test set within a margin of .05 of their value on the training set. While we do adjust the output on the test set, we never use the ground truth on the test set and instead working from the assumption that it should be similarly distributed as the training set. When running the debiasing al- gorithm, we set η = 10 −1 and optimize for 100 iterations.In this section, we use the approaches outlined in Section 3 to quantify the bias and bias amplifi- cation in the vSRL and the MLC tasks. Figure 2(b) along the x-axis, similarly to imSitu, we ana- lyze bias of objects in MS-COCO with respect to males. MS-COCO is even more heavily bi- ased toward men than imSitu, with 86.6% of ob- jects biased toward men, but with smaller average magnitude, 0.65. One third of the nouns are ex- tremely biased toward males, 37.9% of nouns fa- vor men with a bias of at least 0.7. Some prob- lematic examples include kitchen objects such as knife, fork, or spoon being more biased to- ward woman. Outdoor recreation related objects such tennis racket, snowboard and boat tend to be more biased toward men. Training on MS-COCO amplifies bias In Fig- ure 2(b), along the y-axis, we show the ratio of man (% of both gender) in predictions on an un- seen development set. The mean bias amplifica- tion across all objects is 0.036, with 65.67% of nouns exhibiting amplification. Larger training bias again tended to indicate higher bias amplifi- cation: biased objects with training bias over 0.7 had mean amplification of 0.081. Again, several problematic biases have now been amplified. For example, kitchen categories already biased toward females such as knife, fork and spoon have all been amplified. Technology oriented categories initially biased toward men such as keyboard and mouse have each increased their bias toward males by over 0.100.We test our methods for reducing bias amplifica- tion in two problem settings: visual semantic role labeling in the imSitu dataset (vSRL) and multil- abel image classification in MS-COCO (MLC). In all settings we derive corpus constraints using the training set and then run our calibration method in batch on either the development or testing set. Our results are summarized in Table 2 and Figure 3.We confirmed our hypothesis that (a) both the im- Situ and MS-COCO datasets, gathered from the web, are heavily gender biased and that (b) mod- els trained to perform prediction on these datasets amplify the existing gender bias when evaluated on development data. Furthermore, across both datasets, we showed that the degree of bias am- plification was related to the size of the initial bias, with highly biased object and verb categories exhibiting more bias amplification. Our results demonstrate that care needs be taken in deploying such uncalibrated systems otherwise they could not only reinforce existing social bias but actually make them worse.Our quantitative results are summarized in the first two sections of Table 2. On the development set, the number of verbs whose bias exceed the original bias by over 5% decreases 30.5% (Viol.). Overall, we are able to significantly reduce bias amplification in vSRL by 52% on the develop- ment set (Amp. bias). We evaluate the under- lying recognition performance using the standard measure in vSRL: top-1 semantic role accuracy, which tests how often the correct verb was pre- dicted and the noun value was correctly assigned to a semantic role. Our calibration method results in a negligible decrease in performance (Perf.). In Figure 3(c) we can see that the overall distance to the training set distribution after applying RBA de- creased significantly, over 39%. Figure 3(e) demonstrates that across all initial training bias, RBA is able to reduce bias amplifi- cation. In general, RBA struggles to remove bias amplification in areas of low initial training bias,  progress with little or no loss in underlying recog- nition performance. Across both problems, RBA was able to reduce bias amplification at all initial values of training bias. likely because bias is encoded in image statistics and cannot be removed as effectively with an im- age agnostic adjustment. Results on the test set support our development set results: we decrease bias amplification by 40.5% (Amp. bias).Our quantitative results on MS-COCO RBA are summarized in the last two sections of Table 2. Similarly to vSRL, we are able to reduce the num- ber of objects whose bias exceeds the original training bias by 5%, by 40% (Viol.). Bias amplifi- cation was reduced by 31.3% on the development set (Amp. bias). The underlying recognition sys- tem was evaluated by the standard measure: top- 1 mean average precision, the precision averaged across object categories. Our calibration method results in a negligible loss in performance. In Fig- ure 3(d), we demonstrate that we substantially re- duce the distance between training bias and bias in the development set. Finally, in Figure 3(f) we demonstrate that we decrease bias amplification for all initial training bias settings. Results on the test set support our development results: we de- crease bias amplification by 47.5% (Amp. bias).Structured prediction models can leverage correla- tions that allow them to make correct predictions even with very little underlying evidence. Yet such models risk potentially leveraging social bias in their training data. In this paper, we presented a general framework for visualizing and quantify- ing biases in such models and proposed RBA to calibrate their predictions under two different set- tings. Taking gender bias as an example, our anal- ysis demonstrates that conditional random fields can amplify social bias from data while our ap- proach RBA can help to reduce the bias. Our work is the first to demonstrate structured prediction models amplify bias and the first to propose methods for reducing this effect but sig- nificant avenues for future work remain. While RBA can be applied to any structured predic- tor, it is unclear whether different predictors am- plify bias more or less. Furthermore, we pre- sented only one method for measuring bias. More extensive analysis could explore the interaction among predictor, bias measurement, and bias de- amplification method. Future work also includes applying bias reducing methods in other struc- tured domains, such as pronoun reference resolu- tion (Mitkov, 2014).
