Machine Translation (MT) is the set of algorithms that aim at transforming a source language into a target language. For the last 20 years, one of the most popular approaches has been statistical phrase-based MT, which uses a combination of features to maximise the probability of the tar- get sentence given the source sentence ( Koehn et al., 2003). Just recently, the neural MT approach has appeared (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom, 2013;Sutskever et al., 2014;Bahdanau et al., 2015) and obtained state-of-the-art results.Among its different strengths neural MT does not need to pre-design feature functions before- hand; optimizes the entire system at once because it provides a fully trainable model; uses word em- beddings ( Sutskever et al., 2014) so that words (or minimal units) are not independent anymore; and is easily extendable to multimodal sources of in- formation ( Elliott et al., 2015). As for weaknesses, neural MT has a strong limitation in vocabulary due to its architecture and it is difficult and com- putationally expensive to tune all parameters in the deep learning structure.In this paper, we use the neural MT baseline system from ( Bahdanau et al., 2015), which fol- lows an encoder-decoder architecture with atten- tion, and introduce elements from the character- based neural language model ( Kim et al., 2016). The translation unit continues to be the word, and we continue using word embeddings related to each word as an input vector to the bidirectional recurrent neural network (attention-based mecha- nism). The difference is that now the embeddings of each word are no longer an independent vec- tor, but are computed from the characters of the corresponding word. The system architecture has changed in that we are using a convolutional neu- ral network (CNN) and a highway network over characters before the attention-based mechanism of the encoder. This is a significant difference from previous work (Sennrich et al., 2015) which uses the neural MT architecture from ( Bahdanau et al., 2015) without modification to deal with sub- word units (but not including unigram characters).Subword-based representations have already been explored in Natural Language Process- ing (NLP), e.g. for POS tagging (Santos and Zadrozny, 2014), name entity recognition (San- tos and aes, 2015), parsing ( Ballesteros et al., 2015), normalization (Chrupala, 2014) or learning word representations (Botha and Blunsom, 2014;Chen et al., 2015). These previous works show different advantages of using character-level in- formation. In our case, with the new character- based neural MT architecture, we take advantage of intra-word information, which is proven to be extremely useful in other NLP applications (Santos and Zadrozny, 2014;Ling et al., 2015a), es- pecially when dealing with morphologically rich languages. When using the character-based source word embeddings in MT, there ceases to be un- known words in the source input, while the size of the target vocabulary remains unchanged. Al- though the target vocabulary continues with the same limitation as in the standard neural MT sys- tem, the fact that there are no unknown words in the source helps to reduce the number of un- knowns in the target. Moreover, the remaining un- known target words can now be more successfully replaced with the corresponding source-aligned words. As a consequence, we obtain a significant improvement in terms of translation quality (up to 3 BLEU points).The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly explains the architecture of the neural MT that we are using as a baseline sys- tem. Section 3 describes the changes introduced in the baseline architecture in order to use character- based embeddings instead of the standard lookup- based word representations. Section 4 reports the experimental framework and the results obtained in the German-English WMT task. Finally, sec- tion 5 concludes with the contributions of the pa- per and further work. sentences. The decoder also becomes a GRU and each word t j is predicted based on a recurrent hid- den state, the previously predicted word t j−1 , and a context vector. This context vector is obtained from the weighted sum of the annotations h k , which in turn, is computed through an alignment model α jk (a feedforward neural network). This neural MT approach has achieved competitive re- sults against the standard phrase-based system in the WMT 2015 evaluation ( Jean et al., 2015).Neural MT uses a neural network approach to compute the conditional probability of the tar- get sentence given the source sentence ( Bahdanau et al., 2015). The approach used in this work ( Bahdanau et al., 2015) fol- lows the encoder-decoder architecture.First, the encoder reads the source sentence s = (s 1 , ..s I ) and encodes it into a sequence of hidden states h = (h 1 , ..h I ). Then, the decoder generates a corresponding translation t = t 1 , ..., t J based on the encoded sequence of hidden states h. Both en- coder and decoder are jointly trained to maximize the conditional log-probability of the correct trans- lation.This baseline autoencoder architecture is im- proved with a attention-based mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2015), in which the encoder uses a bi-directional gated recurrent unit (GRU). This GRU allows for a better performance with long Word embeddings have been shown to boost the performance in many NLP tasks, including ma- chine translation. However, the standard lookup- based embeddings are limited to a finite-size vo- cabulary for both computational and sparsity rea- sons. Moreover, the orthographic representation of the words is completely ignored. The standard learning process is blind to the presence of stems, prefixes, suffixes and any other kind of affixes in words.As a solution to those drawbacks, new alterna- For our experiments in neural MT, we selected the best character-based embedding architecture proposed by Kim et al. (Kim et al., 2016) for lan- guage modeling. As the Figure 1 shows, the com- putation of the representation of each word starts with a character-based embedding layer that as- sociates each word (sequence of characters) with a sequence of vectors. This sequence of vectors is then processed with a set of 1D convolution filters of different lengths (from 1 to 7 charac- ters) followed with a max pooling layer. For each convolutional filter, we keep only the output with the maximum value. The concatenation of these max values already provides us with a representa- tion of each word as a vector with a fixed length equal to the total number of convolutional ker- nels. However, the addition of two highway layers was shown to improve the quality of the language model in ( Kim et al., 2016) so we also kept these additional layers in our case. The output of the second Highway layer will give us the final vec- tor representation of each source word, replacing the standard source word embedding in the neural machine translation system. other than German or English. Statistics are shown in Table 1    In the target size we are still limited in vocabu- lary by the softmax layer at the output of the net- work and we kept the standard target word em- beddings in our experiments. However, the results seem to show that the affix-aware representation of the source words has a positive influence on all the components of the network. The global optimiza- tion of the integrated model forces the translation model and the internal vector representation of the target words to follow the affix-aware codification of the source words.The phrase-based system was built using Moses ( Koehn et al., 2007), with standard parameters such as grow-final-diag for alignment, Good- Turing smoothing of the relative frequencies, 5- gram language modeling using Kneser-Ney dis- counting, and lexicalized reordering, among oth- ers. The neural-based system was built using the software from DL4MT 2 available in github. We generally used settings from previous work (Jean et al., 2015): networks have an embedding of 620 and a dimension of 1024, a batch size of 32, and no dropout. We used a vocabulary size of 90 thou- sand words in German-English. Also, as proposed in (Jean et al., 2015) we replaced unknown words (UNKs) with the corresponding source word using the alignment information.This section reports the data used, its preprocess- ing, baseline details and results with the enhanced character-based neural MT system.We used the German-English WMT data 1 includ- ing the EPPS, NEWS and Commoncrawl. Pre- processing consisted of tokenizing, truecasing, normalizing punctuation and filtering sentences with more than 5% of their words in a language Table 3 shows the BLEU results for the baseline systems (including phrase and neural-based, NN) and the character-based neural MT (CHAR). We also include the results for the CHAR and NN systems with post-processing of unknown words, which consists in replacing the UNKs with the cor- responding source word (+Src), as suggested in ( Jean et al., 2015). BLEU results improve by al- most 1.5 points in German-to-English and by more than 3 points in English-to-German. The reduction in the number of unknown words (after postpro- cessing) goes from 1491 (NN) to 1260 (CHAR) in the direction from German-to-English and from 3148 to 2640 in the opposite direction. Note the 1 Berichten zufolge hofft Indien darber hinaus auf einen Vertrag zur Verteidigungszusammenarbeit zwischen den beiden Nationen . Phrase reportedly hopes India , in addition to a contract for the defence cooperation between the two nations . NN according to reports , India also hopes to establish a contract for the UNK between the two nations . CHAR according to reports , India hopes to see a Treaty of Defence Cooperation between the two nations . REF India is also reportedly hoping for a deal on defence collaboration between the two nations . 2 SRC der durchtrainierte Mainzer sagt von sich , dass er ein " ambitionierter Rennradler " ist . Phrase the will of Mainz says that he a more ambitious . NN the UNK Mainz says that he is a " ambitious , . " CHAR the UNK in Mainz says that he is a ' ambitious racer ' . REF the well-conditioned man from Mainz said he was an " ambitious racing cyclist . " 3 SRC die GDL habe jedoch nicht gesagt , wo sie streiken wolle , so dass es schwer sei , die Folgen konkret vorherzusehen . Phrase the GDL have , however , not to say , where they strike , so that it is difficult to predict the consequences of concrete . NN however , the UNK did not tell which they wanted to UNK , so it is difficult to predict the consequences . CHAR however , the UNK did not say where they wanted to strike , so it is difficult to predict the consequences . REF the GDL have not said , however , where they will strike , making it difficult to predict exactly what the consequences will be .   number of out-of-vocabulary words of the test set is shown in Table 1. The character-based embedding has an impact in learning a better translation model at various levels, which seems to include better alignment, reordering, morphological generation and disam- biguation. Table 2 shows some examples of the kind of improvements that the character-based neural MT system is capable of achieving com- pared to baseline systems. Examples 1 and 2 show how the reduction of source unknowns improves the adequacy of the translation. Examples 3 and 4 show how the character-based approach is able to handle morphological variations. Finally, example 5 shows an appropriate semantic disambiguation. tation in vocabulary size.In this paper we have proposed a modification to the standard encoder/decoder neural MT architec- ture to use unlimited-vocabulary character-based source word embeddings. The improvement in BLEU is about 1.5 points in German-to-English and more than 3 points in English-to-German.As further work, we are currently studying dif- ferent alternatives (Chung et al., 2016) to extend the character-based approach to the target side of the neural MT system.
